Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
we are going to be talking
about Artificial Intelligence.
At the start of December, I got
access to a tool called ChatGPT,
an Artificial Intelligence Chatbot.
I played around with it for much of the
weekend, and it is absolutely amazing.
So, in this episode I am going to talk
about Artificial Intelligence, and the
way in which I think this technology
is going to impact language learning.
Long story short, I think it will
provide some fantastic opportunities
for language learners, and it’s one
of the most exciting developments
in language learning history.
So, I’m super excited to share
my thoughts with you today.
OK then, Artificial Intelligence
and language learning.
Now, what better way to start an
episode about Artificial Intelligence
and language learning than the
words, literally, of a robot, an AI.
I asked an AI chatbot “What impact
will AI have on language learning?”
I literally typed those words,
and within a couple of seconds,
the response came back.
AI [Artificial Intelligence] is
expected to have a significant
impact on language learning.
AI technologies, such as natural language
processing and machine learning, are
already being used in language learning
tools, such as language learning
apps and online tutoring platforms.
These tools can provide personalized
and adaptive learning experiences,
by analyzing the user's language
abilities and providing customized
feedback and recommendations.
In addition, AI can be used to create
virtual language learning assistants,
such as language tutors or conversation
partners, who can interact with language
learners in real-time and provide
feedback on their language skills.
These assistants can help language
learners improve their speaking,
listening, reading, and writing skills,
and can provide a more engaging and
interactive learning experience.
Overall, the use of AI in language
learning is expected to improve
the efficiency and effectiveness
of language learning, by providing
personalized, adaptive, and interactive
language learning experiences.
OK, human me, it's
Alastair here, I’m back.
This was literally the response
of a robot, this was Artificial
Intelligence responding to my question.
Could you tell that it was a robot?
Did it sound unnatural?
No, it didn’t.
It provided a pretty good answer, in
perfect, grammatically correct English.
Nice work, Robot.
If you have tried “language learning
AI chatbots” in the past, they are
almost always frustrating to use,
they don’t understand what you are
saying, and it’s a significantly worse
experience than speaking with a human.
This one, ChatGPT, is
completely different.
So, what does this mean?
How is this going to affect language
learning, and what does it mean for you?
Well, you heard the AI’s response,
now it’s time for my human response.
To approach this question, I want
to first start with a brief overview
of what AI actually is, and how
it has developed over the years.
Then, we’ll talk very briefly about how
language learning has changed over time.
And then we’ll get to the best
bit, some practical examples of
how you can use this now, and how
it will affect you in the future.
Right, so what actually is AI,
what is Artificial Intelligence?
AI is the ability of a computer or
machine to seem intelligent, to answer
questions or do things like a human.
Think about how you, as a human
being, respond to a question.
You listen, understand what you
are being asked, and then you
consult the information available
to you, based on your experience
and knowledge, to give an answer.
Perhaps this is an easy question, like:
“What’s your name, or is it raining?”
Or maybe it’s a harder one, like: “What
were the reasons for the Great Depression
or what circumstances could have led
to the Titanic not sinking so quickly?”
Or maybe it’s an even harder one, like,
“How can we reduce global warming or how
can our country improve health outcomes?”
In all of these cases, to try to
answer these questions, you consult the
information available to you, analyse
that information, and provide an answer.
Artificial Intelligence
works on a similar principle.
It is a set of algorithms that analyse
a large amount of data, learn from
this data, and then do things, do
whatever you ask, based on that data.
Now, AI has been around
for quite a long time.
The idea was first explored back
in 1956, but it is only in the past
few years that it has really got
to a point where it is able to be
reliably used to replace humans.
You already use AI-powered products,
even though you might not realise it.
You might use something like Grammarly
to help correct your English writing,
that uses Artificial Intelligence to
give you suggestions about your writing.
If you use Google and you start
typing in something and you see some
suggested similar queries, that is
powered by artificial intelligence.
Siri, Google Assistant, Alexa,
these services all make use
of AI to help you do stuff.
But, no offence to Siri or Alexa,
what they do is quite simple.
You tell them to play a song or
read you a message or tell you the
capital of Iceland, and they do it.
The difference between this and what is
coming next, and what you can already see
with ChatGPT is seismic, it’s very large.
So, a quick note on ChatGPT.
First, I guess I should have said this
at the start, but I have no commercial
relationship with ChatGPT, they aren’t
paying me to say this, I just think it’s
amazing and want to tell you about it.
The second practical point is that ChatGPT
is available to everyone, it’s free [or
at least, it was free when I used it],
and the best way of experiencing what
I’m talking about is by going to the
website and playing with it yourself.
I’ll put a link in the show notes.
ChatGPT is an assistant powered
by AI, by Artificial Intelligence.
It is a product of a company
called OpenAI, a research institute
founded in 2015 by Elon Musk and
another influential Silicon Valley
entrepreneur called Sam Altman.
OpenAI has developed a
series of AI algorithms.
There’s one that can create images from
text prompts, so you can say “draw a
picture of Napoleon eating a banana
in a pop-art style”, or “create some
professional-looking headshots based
on this photo of me at the beach”.
It can generate music based on
inputs, and it can tell you how
to fix bugs in your computer code.
These are all amazing, but until
recently they were not particularly
accessible to anyone without the
necessary technical knowledge.
Then, at the very end of November,
2022, OpenAI released ChatGPT.
It looks like any messaging app, you
type in a command in normal English,
and you will receive a response back.
And the possibilities are endless.
It can write fictional stories, it can
correct computer code, it can give you
love advice, it can give you recipes
based on allergies, it can write songs,
this list could continue for years.
So, instead of listing everything
that this chatbot can do, we are
going to focus on language learning.
So, how can this help you, as a language
learner, as someone learning English?
The first thing to say is that I think
it’s excellent news for language learners,
and perhaps the best and most exciting
development for language learners
in the history of language learning.
You might think that this
is an exaggeration, but I
really don’t think it is.
100 years ago, as someone trying to
learn English in, let’s say Brazil or
Japan or Turkey, you might never hear
anyone speaking native English, even
if you learned it your entire life.
50 years ago, as someone learning
English, you would probably rely
on one person, your teacher.
This teacher might have some
textbooks, and some tapes of native
English speakers in conversation.
Now, or even 10 years ago, you can watch
English movies, listen to English podcasts
like this one, and you can find an English
teacher online at the click of a button.
Great, wonderful, you have more
access to content and to native
speakers than ever before.
But, it’s still a bit tricky to
find out when you make mistakes.
You need another human to help you,
someone to say “Hey Francois, it’s
better to say “my brother’s dog”
than “the dog of my brother””, so
someone to point you in the right
direction when you make a mistake.
AI can serve this purpose.
Not only can it correct you when
you make a mistake, but it can
explain it to you for the future, so
you don’t make this mistake again.
And I’m not talking about some expensive
product that you need to buy, or some
Chrome extension that just tells you
when you're going wrong, but you can
do this now, for free, with ChatGPT.
Now, at the moment it’s a chatbot,
it works via text input, you write
something and it responds in writing.
Clearly, this is a bit limiting,
it's a bit restrictive, because
you learn a language to be
able to communicate verbally,
speaking, not only in written form.
But again, it’s only a matter of time
before you can speak to it and it will
be able to respond to you in natural,
spoken English, exactly like you were
having a conversation with a human being.
Now, I can imagine that you might
be sitting there listening to me
squirming, being uncomfortable, thinking
“I would never do that”, I want to
talk to a real person, not a robot.
Maybe you’ve seen films like Ex Machina
or Her, and you thought it was creepy
and weird that anyone could form a
human-like relationship with a computer.
I don’t blame you, I feel
exactly the same way.
At the moment it does feel unusual
and strange, but how I think you
should think about this is that it
presents a wonderful opportunity.
Now, I want to pause for a moment and ask
you to imagine a world where you could
listen to someone talking in English,
at exactly the speed that you could
understand, you could ask them to pause
and repeat something, you could ask them
questions, they could ask you questions,
they would correct you if you made a
mistake, they would explain that mistake
to you, and you would learn from it.
At the moment, I’m describing
something that does exist already.
It’s the experience of speaking with
someone in English, a private tutor for
example, which is great, but it’s not
always free, it can be quite  expensive,
and there are limitations to it.
Now, imagine a world in which this was
accessible to anyone in the world, at
any time of day, for free, and you were
talking to someone with a superhuman
knowledge, someone who was able to
talk about everything from the Ancient
Egyptians to Formula One, someone who
was endlessly patient with you, and
would correct your mistakes, someone
who would never get bored or need to
go to the toilet or who would get ill.
Yes, this “person” might not be a person
at all, it might be an AI assistant, but
it is hugely democratising, it means that
anyone, anywhere, can learn to speak a
language; cost, time and location become
no object, they are no longer factors.
Now, this is perhaps a futuristic
example, and one that you might
not be so comfortable with.
But there are plenty of examples
of how AI can help you today,
examples that I am confident that
you will be very comfortable with.
For example, written English.
If you need to use English at work, you
probably need to send emails in English.
When we made our Business English
course a few months ago, one of
the biggest pieces of feedback we
got was about emails in English.
What tone should you take?
How long or short should an email be?
Should I write Dear Sir or
should I write “Hi Jim”?
And how can I check that my written
English is clean and error free?
The great news is that, with an AI
Chatbot like this, you do not have
to worry about that any more, or at
least this becomes infinitely easier.
You can ask the Chatbot to write
an email for you and it will do it.
Tell it what you want to say, the
tone that you want it to write
it in, formal, friendly etc.,
and ta-da, it will write it.
This is super exciting, because it means
that you can focus on more important
things than the tone of your emails, and
it levels the playing field, it means that
you shouldn’t be treated any differently
as a non-native English speaker at work.
Similarly, if you are a non-native English
speaker who needs to write in English at
university, let’s say, you can focus more
on the quality of your ideas than on the
grammatical correctness of your writing.
Again, this is excellent news,
because it levels the playing field,
it means that the focus is on the
arguments you are making rather
than the language you make them in.
The elephant in the room, perhaps,
is that if you start to rely on AI
to write for you, if you are never
forced to learn for yourself, then
you won’t learn, you won’t improve.
If you don’t make mistakes because
you ask an AI to write for you, there
will be no mistakes to learn from.
Clearly, this is problematic.
It’s problematic in written English,
because you will never learn to
write properly, you won’t pick up
new words and phrases when writing.
But it’s especially problematic when
it comes to listening and speaking.
With reading and writing, you have
the time to process information
and formulate a response.
An AI can help you.
With listening and speaking, especially
when it comes to real human-conversation,
which is after all the main point
of language learning, you don’t.
You have to listen and understand,
and then respond yourself,
an AI can’t do this for you.
You might be thinking that there is
a world in the future where an AI
translates in real-time straight into your
brain, and you can simply think about a
response and this AI will automatically
translate it to perfect English.
But we are quite some way off from
there yet, even if that sounds
like a appealing proposition.
So, how can you use AI now?
Well, if you are prepared to put in
the work, to learn how to learn from
your mistakes and to self-correct, then
there are some amazing opportunities.
Use an AI to write for you,
then compare what you would have
said with what it suggested.
But don’t leave it here.
If you don’t understand something,
ask the AI to explain it for you.
Ask an AI for feedback on your work.
And make sure that you combine this with
activities that will help you retain,
remember this knowledge - make sure
that you use these corrections in your
written and spoken English, so that they
are being retained, they are not just
going in one ear and out of the other.
Ultimately, an AI can help you in a myriad
of ways, it can correct you and explain
your mistakes, but it can’t learn for you.
It can make the journey to fluency
shorter, more accessible, and reduce the
cost, but there will always be a journey.
You’ve probably heard me say this
before, but the more you can learn
to enjoy this journey, and enjoy the
process of learning and creating the
knowledge inside your own head, then the
more satisfying not just the journey,
but also the final results will be.
Think about it this way.
An AI assistant like ChatGPT might be able
to write you a perfectly correct email or
sales letter to a customer, and win the
admiration of your boss and colleagues,
it might even help get you a promotion.
But will you really have learned
anything from it, will there be any
huge inner satisfaction that you feel?
Perhaps, but it’ll probably
be temporary, and you won’t
necessarily have internalised it.
But if you treat this technology as
another way to improve your own linguistic
knowledge, of improving your grammar and
vocabulary, and then the next time you
can get there without AI, not only will
that be hugely satisfactory on an internal
level, but it’ll be far more long-lasting.
Ultimately, almost everyone learning
a language is doing so because they
want to connect with other humans.
Robots and AI can certainly help with
this, to some extent, but remember,
to go all the way, you can’t rely
just on artificial intelligence.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on AI and language learning.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
This is actually going to be part
one of a two-part exploration of AI.
Next up is going to be an episode
where we will ask the question of
whether an AI can write a podcast.
A quick spoiler alert is
that, yes, it can…sort of.
If you don’t want to wait for that
one, I’d encourage you to check out
the Leonardo English blog, where you
can watch a video of me trying to
get an AI chatbot to write a podcast
episode in real time using ChatGPT.
And on that note, I would certainly
encourage you to check out ChatGPT.
I’ll put the link in the show notes,
or you can just google Chat OpenAI.
That really is the best way to
see what this is all about, and
it does feel somewhat magical.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Do you think AI is a positive
thing for language learners?
How can you see yourself using it?
And what about society more
broadly, how do you think AI will
change the way we live our lives?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.